The History Of A Family

Chapter I. Fyodor Pavlovitch Karamazov

Alexey Fyodorovitch Karamazov was the third son of Fyodor Pavlovitch
Karamazov, a land owner well known in our district in his own day, and
still remembered among us owing to his gloomy and tragic death, which
happened thirteen years ago, and which I shall describe in its proper
place. For the present I will only say that this “landowner”—for so we used
to call him, although he hardly spent a day of his life on his own
estate—was a strange type, yet one pretty frequently to be met with, a type
abject and vicious and at the same time senseless. But he was one of those
senseless persons who are very well capable of looking after their worldly
affairs, and, apparently, after nothing else. Fyodor Pavlovitch, for
instance, began with next to nothing; his estate was of the smallest; he
ran to dine at other men's tables, and fastened on them as a toady, yet at
his death it appeared that he had a hundred thousand roubles in hard
cash. At the same time, he was all his life one of the most senseless,
fantastical fellows in the whole district. I repeat, it was not
stupidity—the majority of these fantastical fellows are shrewd and
intelligent enough—but just senselessness, and a peculiar national form of
it.

He was married twice, and had three sons, the eldest, Dmitri, by his first
wife, and two, Ivan and Alexey, by his second. Fyodor Pavlovitch's first
wife, Adelaïda Ivanovna, belonged to a fairly rich and distinguished noble
family, also landowners in our district, the Miüsovs. How it came to pass
that an heiress, who was also a beauty, and moreover one of those vigorous,
intelligent girls, so common in this generation, but sometimes also to be
found in the last, could have married such a worthless, puny weakling, as
we all called him, I won't attempt to explain. I knew a young lady of the
last “romantic” generation who after some years of an enigmatic passion for
a gentleman, whom she might quite easily have married at any moment,
invented insuperable obstacles to their union, and ended by throwing
herself one stormy night into a rather deep and rapid river from a high
bank, almost a precipice, and so perished, entirely to satisfy her own
caprice, and to be like Shakespeare's Ophelia. Indeed, if this precipice, a
chosen and favorite spot of hers, had been less picturesque, if there had
been a prosaic flat bank in its place, most likely the suicide would never
have taken place. This is a fact, and probably there have been not a few
similar instances in the last two or three generations. Adelaïda Ivanovna
Miüsov's action was similarly, no doubt, an echo of other people's ideas,
and was due to the irritation caused by lack of mental freedom. She wanted,
perhaps, to show her feminine independence, to override class distinctions
and the despotism of her family. And a pliable imagination persuaded her,
we must suppose, for a brief moment, that Fyodor Pavlovitch, in spite of
his parasitic position, was one of the bold and ironical spirits of that
progressive epoch, though he was, in fact, an ill-natured buffoon and
nothing more. What gave the marriage piquancy was that it was preceded by
an elopement, and this greatly captivated Adelaïda Ivanovna's fancy. Fyodor
Pavlovitch's position at the time made him specially eager for any such
enterprise, for he was passionately anxious to make a career in one way or
another. To attach himself to a good family and obtain a dowry was an
alluring prospect. As for mutual love it did not exist apparently, either
in the bride or in him, in spite of Adelaïda Ivanovna's beauty. This was,
perhaps, a unique case of the kind in the life of Fyodor Pavlovitch, who
was always of a voluptuous temper, and ready to run after any petticoat on
the slightest encouragement. She seems to have been the only woman who made
no particular appeal to his senses.
